---
title: "Understanding aberrant driving intentions based on the Theory of Planned Behavior: Literature review and meta-analysis"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
date: 2024-05-15
venue: "Journal of Safety Research, 90, 225–243 (Q1)"
paperurl: "https://elhafidy1.github.io/files/jsr-aberrant-driving-2024.pdf"
url: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsr.2024.05.005"
excerpt: ""
citation: "El Hafidy, A., Rachad, T., & Idri, A. (2024). Understanding aberrant driving intentions based on the Theory of Planned Behavior: Literature review and meta-analysis. Journal of Safety Research, 90, 225–243."
---
Introduction: Despite deployed efforts to establish strict road safety standards, human factors is still the leading cause of road crashes. To identify determinants of driver’s behavior, TPB (Theory of Planned Behavior) is widely used as a prominent theory of behavior change. However, the existence of different aberrant driving behaviors (decision errors, recognition errors, violations, and physical condition related errors) and several studies using TPB to understand driving behavior, makes it important to conduct a literature review and a meta-analysis of existing studies to use their results in effective driving behavior change interventions. Method: The selection process provided 125 relevant studies that were published between 1991 and 2022, and that used TPB for the understanding of aberrant driving behavior. Five fundamental research questions were defined to identify in- formation to be discovered from the literature review and from the meta-analysis. Results: In addition to the standard TPB constructs (attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control), past behavior, moral norms, and descriptive norms were used in studies for a more comprehensive understanding of aberrant driving intention. This analysis demonstrated a significant correlation between aberrant driving intentions and past behavior. Also, moral norms construct was correlated with violations and recognition errors, whereas descriptive norms construct was correlated just with recognition errors. Conclusions: The results of this study highlight the strength of TPB in the prediction of aberrant driving intention and its potential effectiveness to guide in- terventions aimed at changing aberrant driving behaviors. The study contributes to the comprehension of the relevant psychological factors influencing the engagement of drivers in each category of aberrant driving be- haviors. Practical Applications: Researchers can use the results of this study to select the relevant psychological factors adapted to their interventions of driving behavior change. The results of the meta-analysis can also be used in the prediction of driver’s intentions.