---
title: "Factors associated with speeding behavior: Literature review and meta-analysis"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
date: 2024-10-15
venue: "Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 107, 861–875 (Q1)"
paperurl: "https://elhafidy1.github.io/files/trf-speeding-meta-2024.pdf"
url: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2024.10.010"
excerpt: ""
citation: "Rachad, T., El Hafidy, A., & Idri, A. (2024). Factors associated with speeding behavior: Literature review and meta-analysis. Transportation Research Part F, 107, 861–875."
---
Background: Exceeding speed limits is one of the most dangerous violations, causing severe in- juries and many deaths every year. For that, several research works focused on understanding and explaining speeding behavior. The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) is widely used to under- stand and explain several human behaviors based on three primary constructs: attitudes, sub- jective norms, and perceived behavioral control. However, several studies have used different versions of the TPB to explain and understand speeding behavior, which constitutes a source of confusion for researchers and intervention designers. Objective: Based on the Theory of Planned Behavior, this study aimed to identify the main de- terminants of speeding behavior by screening and analyzing the results of relevant studies in the literature. Methods: A literature review will identify relevant research related to using TPB to explain and understand speeding behavior. Subsequently, a meta-analysis will synthesize and combine the results of the selected studies, providing an improved TPB model of speeding behavior. Results: The obtained results suggest that in addition to the three standard constructs of the original TPB, moral norms and past behavior should be included as key determinants of speeding intention and behavior. Conclusion: Moral norms and past behavior have been found to be key determinants of speeding behavior. This finding will contribute to the development of more effective behavior change interventions aimed at encouraging adherence to speed limits by taking into account the influence of moral norms and past behavior.